Useful online resources:

- A good video exploring several locomotion methods  

		https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p0YxzgQG2-E

- A research site dedicated to cybersickness

		http://www.cybersickness.org/web_index.htm

——————————————————————————————————————————————————


BeLaSoVi1979			“The Role of Vision in the Control of Posture During Linear Motion” - The authors 
					review findings concerning the role of vision in the control of posture and present 
					comparison between the frequency response curves for linear vection and for postural
					oscillations induced by moving visual scenes. 

BePaYo1975			“Perception of Linear Horizontal Self-Motion Induced by Peripheral Vision (Linear 
					vection) Basic Characteristics and visual-Vestibular Interactions” - The basic charac-
					tourists of sensation of linear horizontal motion is studied. Image velocity and lumi-									nance thresholds of linearvection are measured. Saturation on vection is found.

BeRaBoMaStPa2012		“Is Vestibular Self-Motion Perception Controlled by the Velocity Storage? Insights
					from Patients with Chronic Degeneration of the Vestibulo-Cerebellum” - The authors									found that self-motion perception is correlated to the function of the velocity storage
					mechanism of the neural central system. The velocity storage mechanism stores
					rotational velocity that is later used to generate reflexive eye movements.

BeStr2016			“Moving in a Moving World: a Review on Vestibular Motion Sickness” - 2016 review					of 					vestibular motion sickness.
	
BleBoWe1998			“Motion sickness: Only one provocative conflict?” - The authors give arguments on
					how a mismatch between the sensed vertical and the subjective vertical as expected
					from previous experience, explains motion sickness in a broad number of scenarios.

BoBleGro2008			“A theory on visually induced motion sickness” - The authors present a theory of VIMS
					based on the idea of conflicts between the sensed and the expected subjective vertical. 

BoBuPaPhMo2008			“Vection change exacerbates simulator sickness in virtual environments” - A constant
					 expanding optic flow is compared with an alternating expanding and contracting one.
					The results suggest that changing vection exacerbate SS.
					
BoBuSto2005			“Rotation Direction Change Hastens Motion Sickness Onset in an Optokinetic Drum” - 
					The rotation of an optokinetic drum was either consistently in the same direction or
					continuously changed. VIMS onset was fastest when drum rotation direction changed.

BraCi2011				“Motion sickness. Part I: development of a model for predicting motion sickness inci-
					hence” - The authors try to develop a 3D extension to the vertical conflict theory.

BuBoUrMy2006			“Rotation Velocity Change and Motion Sickness in an Optokinetic Drum” - The authors
					show that changing rotation velocity increases sensory conflict that leads to more 
					VIMS compared to constant rotation velocity.

ChBaZhSo2016			“Visually induced motion sickness when viewing oscillations of different frequencies 
					along the fore-and-aft axis: keeping velocity versus amplitude constant” - The study
					investigates whether the level of VIMS would change if the RMS velocity value or
					amplitude of displacement of visual oscillations are kept constant while manipulating 
					the visual oscillations frequency.

ChoJa1972			“Further Studies of Human Locomotion: Postural Stability and Control” - The authors
					model the locomotion of the human upper trunk as a multidimensional inverted
					pendulum.

DaRaCo2007			“Labyrinthine lesions and motion sickness susceptibility” - The authors explore the 
					hypothesis that motion sickness has to do with the velocity storage mechanism which
					determines the low frequency characteristics and orientation of eye velocity toward										gravity.

DiHo2011			“Visually induced motion sickness: Single- versus dual-axis motion” - The paper ex-
					pores the generated VIMS comparing oscillation roll motion, linear motion in the fore-
					and-aft axis, and spiral motion. Spiral motion had an atypical decrease in VIMS attri-
					buted to a quarantine effect due to the improbability of a real scenario containing that
					kind of stimulus.
 
DiHo2013			“Frequency Characteristics of Visually Induced Motion Sickness” - The authors offer
					an analysis on the influence of oscillation frequency on VIMS. They found that osci-
					llations in linear motion with frequency between 0.2 Hz and 0.4 Hz produce a peak 
					on VIMS.

DiUkHo2007			“Visually Induced Motion Sickness with Radial Displays: Effects of Gaze Angle and
					Fixation” - The paper studies eccentric gaze position while the subjects are exposed
					to expanding optic flow (emulating linear motion). Forced eccentric gaze postion sig-
					nificantly increased motion sickness and facilitated vection.

DoFi2014			“Ramps are Better than Stairs to Reduce Cybersickness in Applications Based on 
					a HMD and a Gamepad” - The authors propose the use of invisible ramps on top of
					stairs to reduce VIMS. Also they compare step-like speed profiles against ramp
					speed profiles with respect of their influence on VIMS. 

DuPaFu2004			“Conflicting Motion Cues to the Visual and Vestibular SelfMotion Systems Around
					0.06 Hz Evoke Simulator Sickness” - The authors present a visual self-motion fre-
					quency response curve against a vestibular self-motion frequency response curve.
					They suggest that conflicting cues at the frequency of maximum crossover of the
					curves (0.06 Hz) are the most likely to produce simulator sickness.

EnSiAl1998			“Relationships between head-shoulder divergences and sickness in a virtual envi-
					remnant” - The authors investigate the relationship between VE sickness and 
					head-shoulder divergence angles while moving through a VE.

Fe2003				“Modeling and Monitoring of Otolith Organ Performance in U.S. Navy Operating
					Environments” - Thesis on performance of otolith organ. The authors present
					a model that represents the otolith organ as a low pass filter. 

FeFe2016			“Combating VR Sickness through Subtle Dynamic Field-Of-View Modification” -
					The authors explore the effect of dynamically changing a physically stationary
					person’s FOV in response to visually perceived motion. By the presented me-
					thod the authors managed to reduced the experienced VR sickness.

Go2016				“Motion sickness” - A chapter in Handbook of Clinical Neurology 2016 about motion
					sickness.

GroBoDe1999			“Otolith Signal Processing and Motion Sickness” - A brief explanation of the prin-
					ciples behind subjective vertical theory. 

HiHo2000			“Habituation to the side effects of immersion in a virtual environment” - Analysis
					on adaptation in VR that produces a decrease on symptoms as individuals are
					continually expose to VR experiences. 
 
HoChi1994			“The contribution of motion, the visual frame, and visual polarity to sensations of
					the body tilt” - The papers elaborate on the types of visual information that contri-										bute to the sense of self orientation with respect to gravity.


HoFi1999			“The nauseogenicity of two methods of navigating within a virtual environment” -
					The study compare the nauseogenicity of two different locomotion strategies for
					exploring a virtual environment while using a HMD.

IsoStandard			“International Workshop Agreement” - An ISO standard regarding image safety. 
					Reducing the incidence of undesirable biomedical effects caused by visual image
					sequences.

JiSoChe2009			“Isolating the Effects of Vection and Optokinetic Nystagmus on Optokinetic Rota-
					ion Induced Motion Sickness” - The authors investigate the effects of vection and
					optokinetic nystagmus (OKN) on VIMS provoked by rotating optokinetic drums.
					They found that VIMS can still occur in the absence of either vection or OKN.

Jo2005				“Introduction to and Review of Simulator Sickness Research” - An U.S. Army
					report about simulator sickness. Terminology, symptoms, measurement, inci-
					dence, adaptation, susceptibility, performance, treatment and theory.

KeRiHeCa2015			“Vection and visually induced motion sickness: how are they related?” - The paper
					show a broad compilation of literature that addresses the connection between VIMS
					and vection.

KhaTuBo2011a			“Theory of a subjective vertical-horizontal conflict physiological motion sickness
					model for contemporary ships” - The paper extends to the subjective vertical theory
					to include effects of horizontal accelerations as well.

KhaTuBo2011b			“Application of the subjective vertical-horizontal-conflict physiological motion sickness 										model to the field trials of contemporary vessels” - This paper explores
					68 field trials of 10 different vessels and compares the percentages of seasick
					passengers against the predictions made by the subjective vertical-horizonta
					theory.

Ko1995				“Simulator Sickness in Virtual Environments” - A military report on simulator 
					sickness. Includes theories of simulator sickness, effects, quantitative tools
					and factors known to influence simulator sickness.

La2014				“Motion sickness: more than cause and vomiting” - A 2014 review of motion
					sickness  with some references to simulator and cyber sickness.

LiRaPa2005			“Effects of Simulated Motion Frequency in Virtual Environments” - Two stu-
					dies are presented to examine the role of simulated motion frequency in 
					VIMS and simulator sickness. The studies are built over the “crossover”
					hypothesis, which suggests that there is a frequency of simulated motion
					that produces  a peak in visual and vestibular system conflicts (0.07 Hz). 

McCa1992			“Cybersickness: Perception of Self-Motion in Virtual Environment” - One of
					the earliest review on cybersickness.

PaMuKi2016			“Vection and cybersickness generated by head-and-display motion in the
					Oculus Rift” - The authors investigate three conditions  of visual compensa-
					tion for physical head movements on yaw rotations. The three conditions are:
					to emulate the rotation of visual stimuli on the opposite direction to the head
					rotation; emulate rotation of visual stimuli on the same direction to head’s
					rotation; not emulate rotation of visual stimuli at all.

RaMaCo1979			“Velocity Storage in the Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex Arc (VOR)” - A rich study on
					vestibular and optokinetic nystagmus (OKN). The authors present a model that 
					postulate that a common storage mechanism is used for producing vestibular 
					nystagmus, OKN and OKAN. This is what is further referred in the literature as the
					velocity storage mechanism. This paper offers a good description of this mecha-
					nism. 

ReOw2016_table			“Review on cybersickness in applications and visual displays: table” - This table
					is a complementary resource to the cybersickness review 2016 ReOw2016. This
					table does an excellent job summarising a great amount of studies, with its dura-
					ion, participants number, design aspect and results.

ReOw2016			“Review on cybersickness in Applications and Visual Displays” - A 2016 review
					completely on cybersickness.

SeMo2015			“Simulator Sickness and the Oculus Rift: A First Look” - The authors measure 
					the simulator sickness experienced in the oculus rift through 2 experiments.
					One consisted in an observation task and the other one in a navigation task.

SoHoLo2001			“A Metric to Quantify Virtual Scene Movement for the Study of Cybersickness:
					Definition, Implementation, and Verification” - The authors propose a metric
					referred to as spatial velocity SV. It combines objective measure of scene comple-
					city and scene movement velocity. They present experiments on cybersickness
					that show that as the SV increases by either increasing scene complexity or 
					scene velocity significantly increased the rated level of cybersickness.

SoLo2001			“Cybersickness in the presence of scene rotational movements along different 
					axes” - The paper investigates the effects of scene oscillations along different
					axes—pitch, yaw or roll—on the level of cybersickness. The main effects of, 
					and interactions among, scene oscillation, duration, and participants are discu-
					ssed.

SoLoHo2001			“Effects of Navigation Speed on Motion Sickness Caused by an Immersive
					Virtual Environment” - The study investigates the effects of navigation speed
					on the level of motion sickness. Root-mean-squares for 8 speeds in the fore-
					and-aft axis are compared. Nausea and vection increased from 3 m/s to 10 m/s
					and beyond 10 m/s, the ratings stabilized.

StHaNaKe2003			“What to Expecto from Immersive Virtual Environment Exposure: Influences
					of Gender, Body Mass Index, and Past Experience” - This study investigated
					potential adverse effects, including the sickness associated with exposure and
					extreme responses. Participants (1102 individuals) were exposed to a VE for
					15 to 60 min, with either complete of streamlined navigational control and simple
					or complex scenes. 

ToDeVaBo2008			“Cybersickness and Desktop Simulations: Field of View Effects and User Expe-
					rience” - The authors examined the effect of differences between the internal
					field of view (FOV which the graphics generator is using to render its images)
					and external FOV (FOV of the presented images as seen from the physical 
					viewpoint of the observer). Congruent internal and external FOVs lead to higher
					incidence of cybersickness.

UjYoSa2004			“Effects of Virtual Body Motion on Visually-Induced Motion Sickness” - The
					authors compare image types (random dots and ordinary scene), different
					rotational speeds and rotation axis. 

Vio2000				“A Discussion of Cybersickness in Virtual Environments” - A discussion on 
					factors that cause cybersickness, theories that have been postulated, and
					possible methods to reduce cybersickness in VEs.

WeGri2003			“Eye Movement, Vection, and Motion Sickness with Foveal and Periphe-
					real Vision” - The authors explore the hypothesis that similar motion sick-
					ness would be produced when tracking a single moving dot and a full
					screen of moving dots, but that vection would be greater when tracking
					multiple moving dots.

WeRaCo1998			“Control of Spatial Orientation of the Angular Vestibuloocular Reflex by the
					Nodulus and Uvula” - Horizontal, vertical, and torsional components of slow 
					phases of nystagmus were analysed to determine the axes of eye rotation, 
					the time constants of velocity storage mechanism, and its orientation vectors.	

YaGuSoChe2011			“Effects of eye fixation on visually induced motion sickness: are they caused
					by changes in retinal slip velocity?” - The authors investigate the effect of
					eye fixation on VIMS. They test 2 different rotation speeds, one 7 degrees
					per second and the other at 60 degrees per second.

——————————————————————————————————————————————————

Additional resources about VIMS

	- “Handbook of virtual environments - Design, Implementation, and Applications”. Kelly S. Hale and
		Kay M. Stanney. CRC Press. Chapter 26.
